Yes, I'm Jan Wielert.
I am an industrial designer and managing director and partner in the
Staubach office.
So, we are a design office
with a focus on mobility broadly.
So, I started here around 15 years ago.
And back then there were a few other topics that we worked on.
Classic product design, capital goods, also digital topics.
And we have increasingly moved into the area of ​​public transport
and really design everything from complete vehicles, interior
exterior drivers, stamping design to small components.
We provide strategy consulting for, for example
, some federal states in Germany when it comes to local transport services.
And we move in this big circle.
What is very important to me, for example, are projects
where we naturally come on board at an early stage.
For example, this is the current project
that we have been doing for the Hamburger Hochbahn for four years.
This involves a new vehicle procurement and in such large projects
there is sometimes the possibility that we can
do so before the vehicle is procured.
Um, yes, we care about design-relevant issues
and passenger issues, so that
the requirements for Das are formulated very specifically in the ordering process in the tender
and not only purely technical requirements
may be included there, but also qualitative factors.
This has
a lot to do with accessibility and I would like to call it the vehicle or the offer
.
The mobility offer is discussed
and specified on a different level.
So yes, basically
there is their freedom in the projects we work on.
Imperative and self-evident and, as you said, of course
required by law.
That's of course even if you
just said that, we also work
in different regions of the world.
Of course, things are sometimes different.
There are regulations here, whether the TS, IBM,
which then specifically sets regulations for vehicles, or the TA in the USA.
And these are the norms and laws that exist.
These are relatively concrete specifications.
Of course you do that.
But there is also a lot more.
I call it further material.
For example, there are recommendation papers, position papers from interest groups
that give recommendations on how things
should be designed
and the most important thing, however, is actually
the exchange with affected people
who want to use local transport and are for us.
So mobility is a basic need and per se it should be inclusive. And if we
can carry out preliminary development
early in the design process -
as I just mentioned with the Hamburger Hochbahn - before
the vehicles are procured , then we
logically talk to all the people involved.
And of course these are the people who have no idea how to clean the vehicle.
It's the people who drive the vehicle.
But of course there are also interest groups, associations
for mobility, people with disabilities, for example.
And if you then talk about things specifically,
you gain even more knowledge, which
could improve the quality of local transport.
So I have a nice example.
We had built the suspension railway in Wuppertal
and had it there as part of our workshop.
It was about materials
and materials and that is of course also a relevant
topic for you people with disabilities, i.e. how can I recognize a problem, etc.
And there was a person sitting there
holding this one handrail the whole time and then was really excited about it,
that it had a different powder coating,
that your hands no longer got so sweaty,
that you can just hold on to it better.
These are things that cannot be stipulated in any standard,
You can actually only experience this through direct exchange.
Basically, our
aim is to create a universal offer.
And that is something where I think we
are experiencing an interesting time, especially in the mobility discourse.
Because
more and more exclusive offers are being discussed on a large stage and offers are being differentiated.
And that is actually exactly the opposite of inclusion.
And we are very much in favor of
offering a comparable offer for everyone at every door.
And of course that may exclude luxury offerings such as massage chairs,
but it does have great added value for the general public,
for every person who moves there.
There are many positive experiences. We.
We can get through.
Through the insights we gain, I think we
can raise awareness quite well.
You may be a little disillusioned
that there is no ideal solution, but that there
is actually always a compromise solution.
And it is important to sensitize the person to this
and gain understanding for it.
So if you now think of it as accessibility.
For example, the needs of a very tall person
and the needs of a very short person
are diametrically opposed and you have to
somehow create offers for both.
And it's the same
with many, many aspects when it comes to information media, etc.
And of course, there are tools that allow you to use multiple senses
and always try to address as many channels as possible according to one principle
when it comes to important information.
This allows you to cover a broad, indeed a broad, field.
But in the end it is always about compromises
and if these are understood and the process
is discussed in a larger group and a result is achieved,
then you automatically have multipliers,
so to speak, who will pass this on in their associations and interest groups.
And the result is suddenly no longer something that seems God-given
and suddenly,
for example, there is
a new vehicle in our industry and you ask yourself why is it like that?
Rather, the process is a little more understandable and well-founded.
And that's a bit
like you did your homework,
so to speak, and took things seriously and didn't
design them on your own initiative, but really according to real needs.
I think this ties directly into the last question.
First of all, understand that you are not designing for yourself.
I think that's really important.
That's something that you
learn a little bit in the university context, but in the end you
're often closest to yourself and do it
the way you think is right.
Especially when it comes to formal aesthetic questions.
And of course there are attitudes and that's okay
if that happens, if you find your way there.
But I think it's important to have a basic understanding that you don't
design for your own interests.